Testing. One, two, three. I guess you might as well
just start out and you might as well just talk about
death for a minute. I had the essay from the first
time you ever saw a dead man. And I realized that you
were a child. And death is a part of life out here,
too. Very much. And let me tell you that I wasn't but
18 years old when I was called on to come and help
dress a corpse. To dress a, yeah. And you know,
that's something that people don't touch their
bodies anymore. They send them on. But I was 18
years old. And Miss came back, called me, and she
said, you're just as well to learn. You have to face
it sooner or later. And I said, oh, I just don't
believe it. She said, oh, yes, you can. And she
sighed, and she put her hands on my shoulders. And
she looked me straight in the eye. She says, honey,
dead people don't hurt you. It's the live ones that
give you trouble. So these have laid all of their
troubles down, and the least we can do is to make it
pleasant for them for their last minutes here on
this earth. And she says, Do you know when you go
take a bath how much better that you feel and how
much you really enjoy it? I said, Yes. She said,
Well, when we wash all of this earthly
feeding off of this body and put it in God's hands,
we've done one of the greatest things that you can
do for humanity. and I thought, I've never heard
anyone express it like that. She said, that's the
last respects that you can pay that person and put
them in God's care. So you washed the body. So I
washed the body, and I will never forget it if I live
to be a million years old. That was a big chore. But
then when she said, and you turn it over to God, and
it's in his care. It's clean. She says, when the
baby comes, you wash it with earthly water. Wash it
in earthly water and return it to God who gave it. No
one had ever talked to me like that. No one had ever
said anything to me like that. So I have, I think, I
thought that that was one of the sweetest ways to
learn that ever was. It is. It was hard. I bet it was.
And I do understand. I mean, I know, too, that
there's a kindness in a death. Sure. That doesn't
show up at any other time in this country. No. But
the day we're born, there's a time set aside for our
deaths. And regardless of what comes, it's going
to be there. It's going to be there. And... God has a
purpose for all of us. And we have a job to do. It may
take us a long time to find it and to fly right to get
it. But we have it, and we'll do it. And you said you
believe that your purpose in life, that you still
have purpose. I remember, I'm going to go back to
the time that I met you, Because that's of a very
important value to me. And that is the time that you
had that massive heart attack and you were giving
up. And I remember, I remember that you just made a
decision. I hope I played a role in it. I like to
think that I did. You sure did. And you, of course,
have fulfilled the purpose of my life since. And
I'm glad that you decided not To give up working on
life and helping other people, because that's
what you've done. You know, I really thought that
my day's work was over. I did, too. I didn't know. I
was scared. I really did. I really thought, well,
this is the end. I can't make a comeback now. I'm too
old. Yeah. Well, I think you can... My grandfather
always said, hold to the end of the road. Hold to the
end of the road. Never leave it shabby.
All right. I didn't hold to the end of the road.
There was something left for me to do. Now, what it
is right now, I actually believe this with all my
heart. And I believe it stronger today than I've
ever believed it before, is helping little folks
like I help today. Having those three little
children to come, and actually the first time in
their life to know what they were doing. To me, that
is worth... A lifetime. Now, to get out here and for
praise for the public, I wouldn't give you two
cents and a half. But God knows what I was doing. And
he knew I was working to make better children. And
he knows what I do. Now, Ava, I know, I just, I think
above race, creed, or color, it doesn't matter to
you. I don't. It don't matter one bit. You have such
a value to go on and to do that kind of work in this
world. I've watched you do it. And it stems from
that belief that you do row to the end of the, you
know, the hole to the end of the rope. The end of the
rope. And you do what has to be done. That's true.
There was a little German. There was a little,
well. Yeah, from Guatemala, you said? Guatemala.
Uh-huh. And then this other little boy was born in
the Yucatan. Yeah. He was from Guatemala, too.
Yeah, somewhere down there. Yeah. All right. Now
they're all different. And they've come up under
different environments. And all together
different ways of life.
You didn't see any difference shown in those
children. No, they were all children. They were
all children to me. They were all God's children.
And I was put here to help them. Well, like I see on
that wall, I see the certificate of a tree that's
been planted. And I'm going to get that down and
read it right now because I know what it says, okay?
I just love it. Because it's the victory forest in
Jerusalem, right? That's right. And that's in
honor of a great teacher, Ms. Ava Johnson Cox, from
a thankful student. That's Eileen Balinski.
That's pretty terrific. Not many. How many people
do you know that have a tree planted? Well, I don't.
You don't know too many. No, uh-uh. You don't, and
that's really nice. Nice? Yeah, it's beautiful.
To me, it's one of the greatest things that ever
happened. Yeah, everything.
I don't want
people, when I die, to get up and say, oh, she was a
wonderful person, she did this, she did that. All I
want that minister to say, this woman lived. And
when I say lived, she lived every day to the fullest
extent. She gave her all, regardless of whatever
it was she had to do. And I do. I put out every ounce of
energy that's in my body for whatever I've got to do
that day. And hope that I have another day coming to
do. This one is the Texas Department of Aid on Aging
Certificate of Appreciation to Ava Johnson Cox
for volunteer service to older Texans. And that's
signed by the governor. And a Republican at that.
Yeah, I noticed that. I will have to say Clements
signed it. We'll excuse that. But that's a grant.
And that's Augusta Lucia? How do you say that?
Augusta Lucia, Jr. And who is? She's the Hebrew
girl. Is she? Yeah. Uh-huh. The chairman or
president of the Texas Department on Aging?
And you feel proud of things like that, Saban.
Well, that's what I say. You said I had no feeling of
class, color, or creed, and I don't. I know. You
don't. You really don't. Well, I go back and, you
know, I do. Just look at Armando yesterday. I know.
Just as thrilled to see him come out, put his arms
around me and kiss me. I know. Just as good a Mexican
as ever lived. That's right. A question, too, I
want to ask you here, because, again, every now and
then, you know, we have to refer to the to Lyndon
because he affected your life because of who he was
and again I want to ask you if you think people say
about him that he didn't really believe in those
civil rights policies that they belong to JFK You
know what I'm talking about. Yes, I know. But that
he didn't really have that incentive. But I want to
know, do you think he did or do you think he didn't?
He doggone sure did. Because it comes from you,
from your family. Yes, it comes from our family
tree. And I'll tell you, he loved those people.
Now, he really did. He pushed civil rights from
JFK. Yes, sir. He pushed it not from JFK. He pushed
it because he believed in it. Okay, that I want to
say to you. And he told me when I went to San Antonio
to teach, that's the greatest thing that I ever did
in my life. And that I... God would reward me for
what I had done for those little Mexican children.
Because you taught in a minority program. I
certainly did. You went straight to do that.
That's all I did. Right. Now, what school was that
that you taught in? Well, I first started out in
John F. Kennedy in San Antonio. Okay. And, well, it
was all in Edgewood District. Edgewood, right.
And that's the poorest district there in San
Antonio. Right. And Stani, Stano, uh...
steinheiser
was my principal and he was the best thing to me that
ever was and he knew that i had that little mexican
feelings at heart and he he did everything he could
to help me he was a good man yeah and i'm not sorry for
for working as hard as i did i'd do it again tomorrow
you drove Before you moved to San Antonio, I know
how you got your education. Did you just stop
planting tomatoes one day and made a decision you
were going to do something? I said that was the
hardest work I ever did in my life, and I could make a
living a lot easier than I could working two acres
of tomatoes with a hoe. So I bundled up my little
self and went to San Marcos in the summer of 48. And I
started out with 12 hours that I had gotten back in
19 and 23 and 24. And that was two hour courses at a
time. That's all the college credits that I had.
Got a certificate standing for it that summer.
That type, yeah. You know, that type. Well, I got a
four-year certificate because I made an average
of 85 on all my courses. Well, anyway, a six-year
certificate. That's what it was. If you make an
average of 85, you get a six-year. And if you make an
average of 75, you get a four-year. Minus 85, thank
goodness. I did have a little sense then. So
anyway. I got my certificate. I enrolled in the
fall semester. I taught school every day and went
to school every night. And in 1950, I walked down
the aisle with my BS degree. And I taught school
every day. And 1952, I got my master's degree. But I
took it easy. I just didn't go every night to
school. You went? On Saturdays. You went to school
on Saturdays. Every Saturday. In order to get your
master's degree. To get my master's degree. And
you did that at Trinity, though, didn't you? At San
Antonio. I got my BS degree at Trinity and my
master's degree at St. Mark's.
But I want to tell you right now, I took work at the
University of Texas. I took work at Lubbock. I took
work at Arkansas and Sam Houston, A&M.
I believe that's all. And the hardest school of all
of them is Trinity University. Don't kid
yourself. You've really got to get out and get with
it. Oh, I did too. I took some Bible study out at the
Lady of the Lake. I'll tell you that. I took history
of the Bible, and that made me sit up and take
notice. Then I took the Old Testament. Then I took
the New Testament.
I've had it. And it was hard. But in order to
understand our history, if you don't understand
the Jewish or Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob's laws and
the beginning of this thing, it's just hard for you
to ever get it down. Well, that's something I want
to ask you about religion. I'm aware that in
Texas... We have a new religion, and it's the New
Testament. But the old-time religions in Texas
didn't just start there. They began in the
beginning. God created the earth and taught
through Genesis on up. And I wonder if today's
religion isn't short-sighting itself, because
this community is still an old community. And I
know it's an Old Testament community. Well, it's
just, I think that's the reason most of these broke
off from the Methodist Church. It's still the old
Methodist Church. I can remember, as a little
girl, we came in the Methodist Church, we knelt.
That was God's house. And we came in. We were quiet.
And we knelt. We went to our pew. We knelt. We made
the sign of the cross and we said our prayer while we
were there. It was quietly said, but we said it.
There was a cross up in the front. We knew what that
cross signified. Today, you just walk in that
church and they start talking and they visit and
they yak, yak, yak. That I just cannot take. That is
sacred. And in the temple, don't you remember,
they were cast out because they did that? And I
can't tell. There's something in me that boils up
that I can't help. I know. And I like to go to the
Pentecostal church and hear them because they do
have lots of good services. But I can't stand the
screaming because in the beginning, God said that
couldn't be. Yeah. And in the temple, when they
began to carry on like that, they were let out. And I
guess I'm just, I don't know what's wrong with me.
How do you feel that things have a sacredness?
There's a sacredness that I can't get away from.
And I know one thing. I got up and walked out of
church one time, and I don't think I was over it. six
or seven years old of course we didn't have such
things the bathroom but i had to tinkle and i got up
and walked out of the church and my daddy just
blistered my little seat good because i didn't
whisper to him and tell him that i needed to go to the
bathroom i got up and walked out of the church and
walked around behind the old hack and sat down and
tinkled all right he said little girls don't do
things like that little girls don't nice little
girls don't get up and leave while the minister's
talking nice little girls Don't interrupt
services by walking out. Well, I got knees. Now,
that's three things I want you to remember. And I
got three swats for each of them. That was nine
swats. I remember them. I remember. Every time you
were also disciplined as a child, you were
disciplined with a principle. Isn't that true?
That's right. Every time there was a reason for it.
Yeah, that's important. Oh, and I tell you right
now, I'd rather to have been whipped so many times
than for my daddy to sit down and talk to me. Talking
to you was worse than getting stanky. He'd set me on
his lap and he'd say, my little princess did me
wrong. I didn't think that she'd ever do that. And
she... Honey, why did you do that? What made you?
Oh. I hurt my daddy's feelings. Oh, that was bad.
But again... You know, I think of the things back to
education and how many years you worked in San
Antonio. How many years again was it? I have it on
that other tape. I went there in 63 and I left in 73.
73, working with minority children all this time
or both? Both. I went then over to the Colonies
North, the Butter District, but I still had the
same problems. Oh, I know. But I don't, I feel so
much enriched. They gave me a sense of feeling that
I had opened the door for them and made them feel
better. Yeah. And you know, that's just worth a lot
to anybody. Oh, it is. It is. Now, you learned to
speak Spanish, too. Yes, I learned to speak
Spanish and I taught Spanish. Yeah. I taught...
You didn't feel like it was a burden to learn
Spanish so you could teach it, did you? You felt it
was important? I thought it was very important. I
think it is important today. And let me tell you,
we're the only nation in the world that doesn't
have two languages taught. The only one. And I
think it's wrong. We need a second language. We do.
And I'm proud that I can talk enough German to get
by. I'm happy. You speak German, you speak
Spanish, you speak English. That's right. I'm
happy. I have my pen in there from... When
you talk about ranching being a labor of love, you
love your land, you love your stock, and you enjoy
doing what you're doing. And I don't care where you
would, my father would take me, he would always
say, look at the land. and get your bearings, you
came this way. And if you're lost, see what kind of a
tree this is. Is it bent over? Is it straight? Is it a
mesquite? We didn't have any mesquites in this
country back in 1900. There wasn't any mesquites.
Right. Well, all right. We had one mesquite on
1,500 acres. Today, we're poisoning mosquitoes
on the same land. I want to ask, right, yeah. Why? I
know it's true. The beans are very, very rich in
protein. And the cattle eat them. The goats eat
them. The horses eat them. Everything eats them.
But. It doesn't destroy it. And they come back up.
They pass through, they're germinated, and they
come up. And we never get rid of them. Never. I
wanted to ask you, what about the grass fires? You
know, the ones that spread all across the state and
burn for ever and ever? For miles and miles. We've
had one couple in our county this year, which...
was a misfortune and it was merely an accident.
Really it was. The wind, it was out and everything,
or they thought it was out for a couple of days. But I
know that the average person that I would talk to
don't know what spunk wood is. But we have it in this
country. And spunk wood is. And spunk wood kept
burning just barely a little at a time, just enough
to keep it warm. Then the wind changed and blew this
spunk wood, as we call it, into grass then it got
started and away it went and we certainly had a
grass fire here that destroyed thousands and
thousands of acres and fences but when I lived on
the ranch and this is the first time and I've been
living here since 1912
And this is the first time that I've ever seen a fire
that lingered as long as this one here. Yeah, I
heard about it. And it was bad. But people, when you
talk to them about spunk wood, they laugh at you.
But it's just old, rotten wood that really hasn't
all decayed. And...
But it has enough life in it that when it is fired, it
stays alive. It stays alive and alive and alive.
Almost like peach bogs. Absolutely. And it is the
hardest stuff in the world to put out. And that's
exactly what happened. Well, I know that the
pioneers talk about seeing these fires come and
that settlers here fought and fought and fought
because these things just swept the Great Plains
for years. Sure they did. I have my grandmother's
diary here and up there on the old ranch. It says
that the grass was up to the horse's stomach.
That's very true. We have grass in wet years on that
place up there because it was a spring and it was
sub-irrigated all the way down and all around that
40 acres that we sold to the park was all
sub-irrigated from that spring. And when we dug
that spring out in 1926,
we dug up many, many bones of cattle. Oh, I mean of
cows and horses and mules. We knew what kind of
bones they were because naturally we had seen
them. And lots of animals. What I mean by that, fox
and squirrel. You can tell a red bone where it comes
from, what type of animal it is in a red bone. Now,
you may not understand what I mean by red bone
animals. But they do have a red bone. A squirrel is a
red bone animal. Oh, really? That's right, if you
don't believe me. Well, that's true. And that's
the thing that I don't understand about people
today. But I guess it's because they have never
been told. No, they've never been told. And
they've never had to know these things. But I was
told when I was quite small about red bone animals.
In fact, they didn't insist that you eat them. Oh,
really? That's right. But during the Hoover days,
I ate plenty of red bone animals. A lot of squirrel?
A lot of squirrel. You betcha. I have too, I know.
And they'll tell you that jackrabbits are no good.
They'll tell you that cottontails are no good. But
if that were the truth, I'd be dead today. That's
all you had to eat. My mother would say,
no meat in the house. If you want meat today, you've
got to get it. Right. Well, I want to tell you one
thing. We didn't have money to buy bullets. So how
do you think we got them? I don't know. Tell me.
Well, you don't say it today because that's awful.
We killed him with a nigger shooter. But they tell
you a slingshot. Well, a slingshot is two long
strings of... with a piece of leather in
connecting it, and you sling it around like that
and let her fly. But a nigger shooter is made with a
stock. Now, it's called that because of what it was
used for. That's right, but if you say a nigger
shooter today, they just give you them. Well, I
think that in American history, we need to know
that it was used to... keep people in the fields,
right? That's exactly what it was used for. It was
to, I'm looking at you, and you're picking cotton,
and you're my slave, right? That's right. Now,
that's something that people don't want to face.
They don't want to face it, but that is the bare
fact. That's what it is. And so help me goodness,
they don't know why it was called a nigger shooter.
But that's bare facts, and that is exactly right.
Well, it's our American historical shame coming
out again, but it's the reality that that's what it
was. I like that little Dutch boy. I ain't got much
shame here. That's truth, and they don't know it.
That's an artifact of American history. And
people need to know why. Well, I was called up on the
carpet because I picked it up off the bed, and I
said, this is a nigger shooter, and Lennon was as
good with a nigger shooter as the next one. Lennon
had an acrid eye, and don't let anybody kid you. He
was good with a nigger shooter. He was good. with a
gun, and don't let them ever tell you that he
couldn't shoot. Because it became a device for
hunting as a weapon. I think that sounded right.
That's right. We used it. We didn't have money to
buy bullets with, and we used this nigger shooter.
And we used a slingshot. And a slingshot was what
David killed Goliath with. That's exactly right.
It's a sling, and it's a slide shot. And we had to
have a certain type of rock for that. And there's
plenty of rocks, but you'd fill your pockets full
of them. We'd kill them in your squirrel with a
slingshot.